 - So far, all the programs we’ve been writing in the course have been written inside of main(). 
 
 - That hasn’t been a problem yet, but it could be if our programs start to become unwieldy. 
 
- C and nearly all languages developed since allow us to write **functions**, sometimes also known as **procedures**, **methods**, or **subroutines**. 
 ****
 - Let’s see what functions are all about. 
 
### What is a function? 
 
 - A *black box* with a set of 0+ inputs and 1 output. 
 

 - A black box with a set of 0+ inputs and 1 output. 
 
 `func(a, b, c)`  
 
 - A black box with a set of 0+ inputs and 1 output. 
 
 `add(a, b, c)` 
 
 - A black box with a set of 0+ inputs and 1 output. 
 
 `mult(a, b)`  
 
#### Why call it a black box? 
 
 - If we aren’t writing the functions ourselves, we don’t need to know the underlying implementation. 
 
 `mult(a, b): output a * b` 
 
 
 - If we aren’t writing the functions ourselves, we don’t need to know the underlying implementation. 
 
 ```c 
 mult(a, b): 
 set counter to 0 
 repeat b times 
   add a to counter 
 output counter
 ```
 
 - If we aren’t writing the functions ourselves, we don’t need to know the underlying implementation. 
 
 - That’s part of the contract of using functions. The behavior is typically predictable based on that name. That’s why most functions have clear, obvious(ish) names, and are well-documented. Functions - 
 
### Why use functions? 
 
#### Organization 
 
   - Functions help break up a complicated problem into more manageable subparts. 
 
#### Simplification 
 
   - Smaller components tend to be easier to design, implement, and debug. 
 
#### Reusability

   - Functions can be recycled; you only need to write them once, but can use them as often as you need! 
   
   
### Functions Declarations
 
- The first step to creating a function is to declare it. This gives the compiler a heads-up that a user-written function appears in the code. 

- Function declarations should always go atop your code, before you begin writing main(). 

- There is a standard form that every function declaration follows.

```c
return-type name(argument-list);
``` 

- The `return-type` is what kind of variable the function will output. 

- The `name` is what you want to call your function. 

- The `argument-list` is the comma-separated set of inputs to your function, each of which has a type and a name. 


#### A function to add two integers. 

```c
int add_two_ints(int a, int b );
```


- The sum of two integers is going to be an integer as well. 

- Given what this function does, make sure to give it an appropriate name. 

- There are two inputs to this function, and we need to give a name to each of them for purposes of the function. There’s nothing important about these inputs as far as we know, so giving them simple names is okay. int add_two_ints(int a, int b); Functions 

#### A function to multiply two floating point numbers. 

- The product of two floating point numbers is also a floating point number. 

- Let’s be sure to give this a relevant name. 

- Again, the names of these particular inputs don’t seem to be important, so we can call them anything simple. float 

#### A function to multiply two floating point numbers.

```c
mult_two_reals(float x, float y); 
```


- The product of two floating point numbers is also a floating point number. 

- Let’s be sure to give this a relevant name. 

- Again, the names of these particular inputs don’t seem to be important, so we can call them anything simple.

#### Function Definitions 

- The second step to creating a function is to define it. This allows for predictable behavior when the function is called with inputs. 

- Let’s try to define `mult_two_reals()`, from a moment ago. 

- A function definition looks **almost** identical to a function declaration, with a small change. 

- How would you fill in this black box? 

```c
float mult_two_reals(float x, float y); 

float mult_two_reals(float x, float y) 
{ 
float product = x * y; 
return product; 
}
```

- A function definition looks **almost** identical to a function declaration, with a small change. 

- How would you fill in this black box? 

```c
float mult_two_reals(float x, float y); 

float mult_two_reals(float x, float y) { return x * y; } 
```

- Now, take a moment and try to define `add_two_ints()`, from a moment ago. 

```c
int add_two_ints(int a, int b); 

int add_two_ints(int a, int b) 
{ 
   int sum;         // declare variable 
   sum = a + b;    // calculate the sum return sum; 
   return sum.    // give result back 
} 
```

- Now, take a moment and try to `define add_two_ints()`, from a moment ago. 
```c

int add_two_ints(int a, int b); 

int add_two_ints(int a, int b) 
{ 
   int sum = a + b; // calc variable return sum; 
   return sum;     // give result back 
} 
```

- Now, take a moment and try to define `add_two_ints()`, from a moment ago. 

```c
int add_two_ints(int a, int b); 

int add_two_ints(int a, int b) 
{ 
  int sum = 0; 
  if(a > 0) 
    for(int i = 0; i < a; sum++, i++); 
  else 
    for(int i = a; i < 0; sum--, i++); 
  if(b > 0) 
    for(int i = 0; i < b; sum++, i++); 
  else 
    for(int i = b; i < 0; sum--, i++); 
  return sum; 
} 
```

#### Function Calls 

- Now that you’ve created a function, time to use it! 

- To call a function, simply pass it appropriate arguments and assign its return value to something of the correct type. 

- To illustrate this, let’s have a look at ==adder-1.c==

#### Function Miscellany 

- Recall from our discussion of data types that functions can sometimes take no inputs. In that case, we declare the function as having a void argument list. 

- Recall also that functions sometimes do not have an output. In that case, we declare the function as having a void return type. 

#### Practice Problem 

- Declare a write a function called `valid_triangle` that takes three real numbers representing the lengths of the three sides of a triangle as its arguments, and outputs either true or false, depending on whether those three lengths are capable of making a triangle. 

- Note the following rules about triangles: 
  - A triangle may only have sides with positive length. 
  
  - The sum of the lengths of any two sides of the triangle must be greater than the length of the third side. 
  
  ```c
  Functions bool valid_triangle(float x, float y, float z); 
  bool valid_triangle(float x, float y, float z) 
  { 
     // check for all positive sides 
    if (x <= 0 || y <= 0 || z <= 0) 
    { 
      return false; 
    } // check that sum of any two sides greater than third 
    if ((x + y <= z) || (x + z <= y) || (y + z <= x)) 
    { 
      return false; 
    } // if we passed both tests, we’re good! return true; }
  ```