• Python is an example of a very commonly-used modern programming language. 
	• C was first released in 1972, Python in 1991. 
	
• Python is an excellent and versatile language choice for making complex C operations much simpler. 
	• String manipulation 
	• Networking 
	
• Fortunately, Python is heavily inspired by C (its primary interpreter, Cpython, is actually written in C) and so the syntax should be a shallow learning curve.

• To start writing Python, open up a file with the *.py* file extension.

• Unlike a C program, which typically has to be compiled before you can run it, a Python program can be run without explicitly compiling it first. 

• Important note: In CS50, we teach Python 3. (Not Python 2, which is also still fairly popular.) 

### Variables

• Python variables have two big differences from C. 
	• No type specifier. 
	• Declared by initialization only.

In C :

```c
int x = 54;
```

in Python3 :

```python
x = 54
```

*• Python statements needn't end with semicolons!*

In C :

```c
string phrase = "This is CS50";
```

In Python3: 

```python
phrase = "This is CS50"
```

### Conditionals

• All of the old favorites from C are still available for you to use, but they look a little bit different now.

In C :

```c
if (y < 43 || z == 15) 
{ 

	// code goes here 

}
```

In Python3: 

```python
if y < 43 or z == 15: 
	# code goes here
```

In C :

```c
if (y < 43 && z == 15) 
{ 
	// code block 1 
} else 
{ 
	// code block 2 
}
```

In Python3:

```python
if y < 43 and z == 15: 
	# code block 1 
else: 
	# code block 2
```

In C:

```c
if (coursenum == 50) 
{ 
	// code block 1 
	
} else if (coursenum != 51) 
{ 

	// code block 2 
}
```

In Python3 :

```python
if coursenum == 50: 
	# code block 1 
elif not coursenum == 51: 
	# code block 2
```

In C :

```c
char var = get_char();
bool alphabetic = isalpha(var) ? true : false;
```

In Python3 :

```python
letters_only = True if input().isalpha() else False
```

### Loops

• Two varieties: while and for

In C :

```c
int counter = 0; 
while (counter < 100) 
{ 
	printf("%i\n", counter); 
	counter++; 
}
```

In Python3 :

```python
counter = 0 
while counter < 100: 
	print(counter) 
	counter += 1
	```

In C : 

```c
for (int x = 0; x < 100; x++) 
{ 
	printf("%i\n", x); 
	
}
```

In Python3 :

```python
for x in range(100):
	print(x)
```

In C :

```c
for (int x = 0; x < 100; x += 2) 
{ 
	printf("%i\n", x); 
}
```

In Python3 :

```python
for x in range(0, 100, 2): 
	print(x)
```

### ~~Arrays~~ -> Lists

• Here's where things really start to get a lot better than C. 

• Python arrays (more appropriately known as lists) are not fixed in size; they can grow or shrink as needed, and you can always tack extra elements onto your array and splice things in and out easily.

• Declaring a list is pretty straightforward.

```python
nums = []
```
```python
nums = [1, 2, 3, 4]
```
```python
nums = [x for x in range(500)]
```
```python
nums = list()
```

• Tacking on to an existing list can be done a few ways:

```python
nums = [1, 2, 3, 4] 
nums.append(5)
```
```python
nums = [1, 2, 3, 4] 
nums.insert(4, 5)
```
```python
nums = [1, 2, 3, 4] 
nums[len(nums):] = [5]
```

### Tuples

• Python also has a data type that is not quite like anything comparable to C, a tuple. 

• Tuples are ordered, immutable sets of data; they are great for associating collections of data, sort of like a struct in C, but where those values are unlikely to change.

• Here is a list of tuples:

```python
presidents = [ 
		("George Washington", 1789), 
		("John Adams", 1797), 
		("Thomas Jefferson", 1801), 
		("James Madison", 1809) 
	]
```

• This list is iterable as well:

```python
for prez, year in presidents: 
	print("In {1}, {0} took office".format(prez, year))
	```

• Result:

```
In 1789, George Washington took office 
In 1797, John Adams took office 
In 1801, Thomas Jefferson took office 
In 1809, James Madison took office
```

### Dictionaries

• Python also has built in support for dictionaries, allowing you to specify list indices with words or phrases (keys), instead of integers, which you were restricted to in C.

```python
pizzas = { 
	"cheese": 9, 
	"pepperoni": 10, 
	"vegetable": 11, 
	"buffalo chicken": 12 
}
```

```python
pizzas["cheese"] = 8
```

```python
if pizza["vegetables"] < 12: 
	# do something
```

• Python also has built in support for dictionaries, allowing you to specify list indices with words or phrases (keys), instead of integers, which you were restricted to in C. 

• But this creates a somewhat new problem… how do we iterate through a dictionary? We don't have indexes ranging from [0, n-1] anymore.

### Loops (redux)

• The for loop in Python is extremely flexible!

```python
for pie in pizzas: 
	# use pie in here as a stand-in for "i"
```

```python
for pie in pizzas: 
	print(pie)

#output:
cheese 
vegetable 
buffalo 
chicken 
pepperoni
```

```python
for pie, price in pizzas.items(): 
	print(price)

#output:
12
10
9
11
```

• format gives one way to interpolate variables into our printed statements in a very printf-like way, but there are others

```python
for pie, price in pizzas.items(): 
	print("A whole {} pizza costs ${}".format(pie, price))
	
#output:
A whole buffalo chicken pizza costs $12 
A whole cheese pizza costs $9 
A whole vegetable pizza costs $11 
A whole pepperoni pizza costs $10
```

### Functions

• Python has support for functions as well. Like variables, we don't need to specify the return type of the function (because it doesn't matter), nor the data types of any parameters (ditto). 

• All functions are introduced with the def keyword. 
	• Also, no need for main; the interpreter reads from top to bottom! • If you wish to define main nonetheless (and you might want to!), you must at the very end of your code have: 
	
```python
	if __name__ == "__main__": 
		main()
```

```python
def square(x): 
	return x * x
```

```python
def square(x): return x ** 2
```

```python
def square(x): 
	result = 0 
	for i in range(0, x): 
		result += x 
	return result

print(square(5))
```

### Objects

• Python is an object-oriented programming language. 

• An object is sort of analogous to a C structure.

• C structures contain a number of fields, which we might also call properties. 
	• But the properties themselves can not ever stand on their own.

```c
struct car 
{
	int year; 
	char *model; 
}

struct car herbie;

herbie.year = 1963; 
herbie.model = "Beetle";
```

• Objects, meanwhile, have properties but also methods, or functions that are inherent to the object, and mean nothing outside of it. You define the methods inside the object also. 
	• Thus, properties and methods don’t ever stand on their own.

```python
object.method()
```

• You define a type of object using the class keyword in Python. 

• Classes require an initialization function, also more-generally known as a *constructor*, which sets the starting values of the properties of the object. 

• In defining each method of an object, self should be its first parameter, which stipulates on what object the method is called.

```python
class Student(): 

	def __init__(self, name, id): 
		self.name = name 
		self.id = id 
		
	def changeID(self, id): 
		self.id = id 
		
	def print(self): 
		print("{} – {}".format(self.name, self.id))
```
```python
jane = Student("Jane", 10) 
jane.print() 
jane.changeID(11) 
jane.print()
```

### Style

• If you haven't noticed, good style is crucial in Python. • Tabs and indentation actually matter in this language, and things will not work the way you intend for them to if you disregard styling! 

• Good news? No more curly braces to delineate blocks! • Now they just are used to declare dictionaries.

### Including files

• Just like C programs can consist of multiple files to form a single program, so can Python programs tie files together

In C :

```c
#include <cs50.h>
```

In Python : 

```python
import cs50
```

• Just like C programs can consist of multiple files to form a single program, so can Python programs tie files together.

```python
cs50.get_int() 
cs50.get_float() 
cs50.get_string()
```

• Python programs can be prewritten in .py files, but you can also write and test short Python snippets using the Python interpreter from the command line. 

• All that is required is that the Python interpreter is installed on the system you wish to run your Python programs on.

• To run your Python program through the Python interpreter at the command-line, simply type: 

```python 
python  <file>
```

• and your program will run through the interpreter, which will execute everything inside of the file, top to bottom.

• You can also make your programs look a lot more like C programs when they execute by adding a shebang to the top of your Python files, which automatically finds and executes the interpreter for you.

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python3
```

• If you do this, you need to change the permissions on your file as well using the Linux command chmod as follows:

```python
chmod a+x <file>
```
